Snails are highly unusual among multicellular animals in that they move on a layer of costly mucus, leaving behind a trail that can be followed and utilized for various purposes by themselves or by other animals. Here we review more than 40 years of experimental and theoretical research to try to understand the ecological and evolutionary rationales for trail-following in gastropods. Data from over 30 genera are currently available, representing a broad taxonomic range living in both aquatic and terrestrial environments. The emerging picture is that the production of mucus trails, which initially was an adaptation to facilitate locomotion and/or habitat extension, has evolved to facilitate a multitude of additional functions. Trail-following supports homing behaviours, and provides simple mechanisms for self-organisation in groups of snails, promoting aggregation and thus relieving desiccation and predation pressures. In gastropods that copulate, trail-following is an important component in mate-searching, either as an alternative, or in addition to the release of water- or air-borne pheromones. In some species, this includes a capacity of males not only to identify trails of conspecifics but also to discriminate between trails laid by females and males. Notably, trail discrimination seems important as a pre-zygotic barrier to mating in some snail species. As production of a mucus trail is the most costly component of snail locomotion, it is also tempting to speculate that evolution has given rise to various ways to compensate for energy losses. Some snails, for example, increase energy intake by eating particles attached to the mucus of trails that they follow, whereas others save energy through reducing the production of their own mucus by moving over previously laid mucus trails. Trail-following to locate a prey item or a mate is also a way to save energy. While the rationale for trail-following in many cases appears clear, the basic mechanisms of trail discrimination, including the mechanisms by which many snails determine the polarity of the trail, are yet to be experimentally determined. Given the multiple functions of trail-following we propose that future studies should adopt an integrated approach, taking into account the possibility of the simultaneous occurrence of many selectively advantageous roles of trail-following behaviour in gastropods. We also believe that future opportunities to link phenotypic and genotypic traits will make possible a new generation of research projects in which gastropod trail-following, its multitude of functions and evolutionary trade-offs can be further elucidated.
Trail-following, where individuals follow the tracks or paths of other individuals, occurs in many animal phyla and has almost certainly evolved many times. The known or perceived roles of this behaviour differ among taxonomic groups   and this may be related to specific selection pressures for trail-following behaviour, and the mechanisms by which trail-following occurs. Many marine mammals, for example, locate their prey through hydrodynamic trails that are prey-generated  . This, however, appears to be a functionally different form of trail-following to that employed by ants optimising food resources through processes of self-organisation via pheromone trails  , or gastropod snails following mucus trails that contain mate-specific cues  . While much work exists on the function of trail-following in social insects [including isolation and identification of pheromones  , self-organisation patterns   and roles of worker ants in maintaining trails  ], few studies have focused on other taxa, other than to acknowledge that trail-following occurs and to suggest adaptive benefits for this behaviour  .
One taxon where trail-following is widely acknowledged to occur is the Gastropoda  . The role of trail-following in gastropods appears multifaceted, and has attracted attention perhaps because of the obvious nature of the mucus trails and the high cost of mucus production. During locomotion, gastropods exert stresses on a thin   layer of secreted pedal mucus, which acts as a glue and a lubricant  . As the animal moves, the mucus left behind forms
a trail that shows the ‘history’ of the individual’s spatial movement patterns.
The morphology of the trail has received little attention, but in the intertidal prosobranch Littorina littorea, the trail has a convex profile, approximately 35 μm at the centre and about 20 μm at the edges  . Gastro- pod pedal mucus largely consists of water   and mucin or mucin-like carbohydrate-protein complexes  , which produce its characteristic sticky properties   and Smith  , for details on the composition and properties of gastropod mucus). Since mucus has a significant organic component, leaving a mucus trail places a considerable energetic burden on gastropods  . Pedal mucus has calorific values of 9–24kJg−1 dry mass  . To put this into context, molluscan   somatic tissue has a calorific value of approximately 20 kJ g−1  , similar to that of secreted pedal mucus. In the intertidal gastropod Littorina littorea, for example, Davies, Jones & Hawkins   demonstrated that the cost of mucus production is much greater   than the metabolic cost of locomotion and Denny   calculated that using mucus as a means of locomotion is an order of magnitude more expensive than any other mode.
An obvious question, therefore, is why do gastropods use such an energetically expensive form of locomotion? Many creeping organisms, for example annelids, can propel themselves without the need of mucus. It has been suggested that gastropods evolved from a platyhelminth-like ancestor that was mucus-coated and moved using ciliary locomotion within a secreted mucus film  . Wilmer   suggested that such locomotion would only be efficient forsmall animals; increased size only being possible when alternative forms of locomotion within the mucus film evolved, as seen in modern-day gastropods. One benefit of using mucus is that its adhesive properties allow snails to attach themselves firmly   and hence can locomote on vertical surfaces and upside-down. These simple benefits allow animals to extend their habitat use into complex three-dimensional and dynamic   environments, and may have driven the evolution of locomotion on mucus, and hence the laying of mucus trails. Once laid, however, these trails can have other benefits to the trail-layer   and it may be that post-deposition functions not associated with locomotion justify the high cost of mucus production.
Herein we review the current state of research on gastropod trail-following; from its functional significance to the possible mechanisms driving this behaviour, and present a synthesis of the ecological and potential evolutionary significance of trail-following behaviour. We also highlight the limited studies on trail-following mechanisms in gastropods to encourage further research into this particular area. It is hoped that this synthesis will stimulate new research into trail-following in gastropods and other taxa.Some gastropods and chitons   return to specific resting positions after feeding excursions, a behavioural pattern termed ‘homing’  . Solitary homers are mostly limpets living on rocky shores that have individual-specific resting sites of varying temporal persistence, termed ‘home scars’, onto which their shell typically fits snugly  . By contrast, collective homers share refuges, in which many individuals aggregate, usually around holes or in crevices  .
Trail-following has frequently been reported in both solitary and collective homers, but it is often described as a complementary or subordinate mechanism rather than a key mechanism in driving homing  . Many homing species, for example, do not necessarily return to their resting sites via the same route as they left; and some homing species, when artificially displaced, are still able to find their way back  , suggesting that trail-following is not the primary means by which these animals locate their homes. Some of these studies, however, overlooked the fact that trails may persist over long periods   and that homing individuals may use old, previously laid, trails to find their way home  . Interruption of trails by various methods such as chiseling or washing the rock have had varying degrees of influence on homing success  , which suggests the presence of species-specific variation in dependence on the use of mucus trails in homing behaviour. Homing is relatively common in intertidal species, perhaps because the selective pressures on homing to a fixed location, as a mechanism to prevent increased desiccation or predation risk, are greater in this environment. Consequently, and because of its accessibility for observation and manipulative experiments, the intertidal zone has yielded most of the evidence for the functional significance of trail-following in gastropod homing. Funke  , for example, showed that replacing the mucus trail of an individual limpet, Patella vulgata, with that of a conspecific could disrupt homing behaviour, suggesting that limpets recognize individual trails, a trait also identified in the collective homer, Onchidium verruculatum  , and in the non-homing Littorina littorea  . The incorporation of individual-specific cues into mucus trails suggests that some homers rely, to a certain degree, on contact chemoreception to return to their individual homes. Further evidence for this is provided by studies showing that many homing species can determine polarity   of the trails they follow to return home  .
The significance of trail-following for homing behaviours cannot, however, be properly interpreted without an understanding of the effects of other factors that have been shown to influence trail-following [e.g. humidity and type of microhabitat   and wind direction  ]. The slug, Limax pseudoflavus, for example, detects air-borne chemical cues carried by the prevailing wind from its resting sites   to aid homing, but when changes in wind direction disrupt these cues, trail-following   may become the dominant mechanism  . While it appears that mucus- trail-following is only one of a variety of tools that gastropods use to return home, it is clear that in some species and under some conditions, trail-followMate location in many aquatic gastropods is mediated by water-borne chemicals   and in terrestrial gastropods by air-borne chemicals  . Mucus-trail- following may be an alternative or a complementary mate-searching strategy to these chemical cues  . In the mostly hermaphroditic opisthobranchs and pulmonates  , mate-searching involves discrimination of species. Conspecific trail-following is commonly observed in these gastropods and, as it often results in courtship, this behaviour has been associated with mate-searching  . Few studies have, however, provided experimental data to confirm this link, although Townsend   demonstrated that sexually aroused freshwater pulmonates, Biomphalaria glabrata, showed a higher degree of conspecific trail-following than non-aroused conspecifics. Nakashima   also provided experimental evidence for trail-following as a means to locate mates in opisthobranchs, showing that in the mating season two nudibranch species   relied on mucus trails rather than on water- borne chemicals to locate conspecifics, and were able to discriminate between conspecific and heterospecific trails. There is also good evidence for species-specific trail cues in dioecious prosobranch gastropods. Ng et al.  , for example, demonstrated that males of two mangrove littorinids, Littoraria ardouiniana and L. melanostoma, were able to discriminate conspecific from heterospecific females by their mucus trails. Individuals of Nassarius vibex can also distinguish conspecific from heterospecific trails  . The incorporation of species-specific cues into mucus trails is, therefore, advantageous in facilitation of mate-searching in both hermaphroditic and dioecious gastropods.For many prosobranch gastropods that have separate sexes  , mate location will be optimized if males not only recognize the correct species but also the correct sex. High-shore littorinid snails have frequently been used as models to study the role of trail-following in mate location because these abundant snails are highly accessible and, in general, can be easily sexed by the presence or absence of a penis. In these snails males actively search for females and are generally able to discriminate conspecific females from conspecific males via their mucus trails  . Owing to infrequent submersion by sea water, trail- borne cues may be more effective than water-borne cues in locating mates in these high shore species. Nonetheless, males of the freshwater snail species Pomacea canaliculata are attracted by water-borne cues from females, and both sexes follow mucus trails of the opposite sex, but females also follow trails laid by conspecific females, making it difficult to conclude whether trail-following is linked to mate-searching  . Despite such variation in behaviour it has frequently been suggested that sex-specific cues are incorporated in gastropod mucus trails   and may play a crucial role in the reproductive success of at least some species.There is limited information on sexual selection through trail- following in gastropods but, again, the high-shore littorinid snails have proved a model study group. Trail-following to locate a mate has generally been regarded as a pre- courtship or pre-copulatory process, and only a few studies have examined the possibility of female quality assessment during trail-following. Males may, at the trail-following stage, be able to gain information about female quality such as body size or parasite infection, and thereby an indication of female fecundity, because fecundity increases with size and snails can become sterile in response to trematode infections  . Gaining this type of information from female mucus trails will enable males to optimize costly mate-searching by choosing to follow the most fecund females.
In littorinids, males show a preference to mate more frequently, and copulate for longer, with larger females  . Saltin   reported that males of Littorina fabalis preferred to follow trails laid by females of a larger species, L. obtusata, over trails laid by smaller conspecific females. These results are puzzling, since the two species are genetically distinct and hybridization is not known  . This example also illustrates the possibility that other beneficial functions of trail-following may be involved in this behaviour, making the identification of a single dominant function difficult. Nevertheless, this study showed that gastropodmales are able to discriminate between trails from females of different sizes, a phenomenon also found in Littoraria ardouiniana   and probably in other gastropod taxa.
In addition to size, the mucus trails of females may carry signals of other aspects of mate quality. Male Littorina littorea, for example, are reluctant to follow mucus trails laid by females made sterile by trematode parasites  . This may be mediated through the male being able to detect the presence of parasites present in the mucus, as trematode cercariae have been identified in mucus trails laid by parasitized snails   demonstrating that male L. littorea avoid such ‘contaminated’ trails. Edwards & Davies   showed that L. littorea can also detect the starvation level of conspecifics from their mucus trails, which also has implications for mate choice. Thus data from studies on littorinids suggest that sexual selection through mucus trail-following is feasible in gastropods.In terms of nutrition, mucus trails appear to have two functional roles: in finding prey and as an energy source through trail ingestion. It has long been known that predatory snails follow the trails of other snails in order to locate and eat them, and this behaviour occurs across broad taxonomic groupings and habitats  . Thus laying a trail can have a survival cost to snails due to the risk of being trackedand located by both molluscan and non-molluscan predators and parasites. Non-molluscan predators include leeches and planarians, which can distinguish between trails of different snail species  , and predatory sciomyzid fly larvae  , while parasites include haematophagous mites  .
It has been suggested that trail-following evolved as a means of recycling energy-rich mucus  . While there is no direct evidence of selective mucus- trail ingestion there is ample evidence of snails feeding on particles in mucus trails during which it would be extremely likely that mucus is ingested  . For aquatic snails, Connor & Quinn   proposed that mucus trails might become organically enriched, trapping microalgae, and could subsequently be ingested by the individual that laid the trail. This strategy would function most effectively for species that follow their own trails on excursions from a central location. Indeed, it has been shown that microalgae grow better in the mucus of homing limpets   than in the mucus of a non-homing limpet or a carnivorous gastropod  . Connor & Quinn   also postulated that animals might add a fertilizer to their mucus to stimulate microalgal growth. According to evolutionarily stable strategy theory, animals that add a fertilizer to their mucus trails to promote the growth of food resources should also be territorial, and therefore gain a direct individual benefit from harvesting their investment; this is the case for L. gigantea but not for M. scabra  . The trail mucus of L. gigantea persists from 4 to 15days, which was argued to be sufficient to allow for algal growth and subsequent ingestion  . Davies et al.   recorded longer persistence times for the trail mucus of Littorina littorea   and for the pedal mucus produced while stationary by Patella vulgata  . The mucus of P. vulgata readily collected organic material but this varied with shore exposure to wave action, with more microalgae being trapped on semi-exposed as opposed to more sheltered shores  . The mucus of this species has also been shown to trap barnacle larvae  . The pedal mucus of some gastropods found in Chile also traps microalgal and macroalgal particles  , and increased microbial activity has also been recorded in limpet and trochid mucus trails, potentially enhancing their nutritive value  . On tropical shores the mucus produced while stationary by the limpet Cellana grata was, however, found to have a shorter persistence time   than mucus produced by its temperate counterparts, and its capacity for organic enrichment was weak  . An extreme form of organic entrapment in mucus trails is exhibited by the mud snail Ilyanassa obsoleta, which traps amphipods for periods of over 1 h, which are subsequently ingested  .
All these studies demonstrate that mucus is sticky and can trap organic particles, but not that it is an important component of an animal’s diet. Further studies, perhaps tracing fatty-acid signatures, are needed to confirm ingestion during trail-following as a significant mode of nutrition. It should also be noted that in some cases the consumption of mucus might not be beneficial. Mucus produced by stationary limpets, for example, can concentrate metals from sea water by over 1000-fold  , and bacterial enrichment of abalone mucus trails may include pathogenic species  . Nevertheless, as Davies & Hawkins   highlighted, given the density of some aquatic snail populations, their movement patterns and the persistence of mucus trails, a great deal of the substratum for much of the time is likely to be covered in mucus. It is, therefore, highly likely that mucus trails will be ingested to some degree and contribute to some extent to the nutrition of benthic grazers. This supposition is further supported by the fact that on encountering mucus trails seeded with microalgae, Littorina littorea altered its behaviour, increasing trail-following, locomotory speed and rasping rate, and algae from the trails were ingested  . These authors noted that ‘trail following seems inextricably linked to nutrition’  , a viewpoint that is likely to be correct.
The functioning of mucus trails in nutrition is dependent on the production rate of mucus, which can vary substantially among species. There is a considerable body of literature describing pedal mucus production rates, but most do not measure trail mucus alone but either involve artificial stimulation of the foot or combine trail mucus with mucus produced by stationary animals  . Those that do report on trail mucus production often express values per unit time, irrespective of how active the animals have been  . Although Edwards & Welsh   reported trail mucus production by Ilyanassa obsoleta as 21.8 μg ash-free dry mass cm−2  , a more common but less informative measure   is mass of dry mucus per unit distance travelled; typical values are in the order of μg mm−1  . Pedal mucus production rates are also affected by environmental conditions. Production rates by Littorina littorea in sea water were, for example, approximately 35% less than in air  ; and similar significant differences were also recorded for Patella vulgata   and Monodonta labio  . This effect might be explained by the decreased apparent weight of snails in water, resulting in a reduced need for mucus to aid locomotion in relatively ‘lighter’ animals  .
